---
layout: post
title: "Bradley Birzer: Sanctifying the World, Pt. II"
subtitle: "Christopher Dawson on other cultures"
category: "Christopher Dawson: Essays"
author: "Christopher Dawson"
tags: [culture, Church, education, pluralism, Erasmus, Reformation]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

More from Bradley Birzer's *Sanctifying the World: The Augustinian Life and Mind of Christopher Dawson:*

> In a famous speech delivered at St. Mary's College at Notre Dame, Indiana, on April 29, 1960, Dawson explained the importance not just of culture, but of Christian Culture: "With Christianity a new dynamic principle enters the life of humanity and reorganizes it round a new spiritual center and toward a new supernatural end." This applies to the individual as well as to the community. Properly understood, the Church should reach and influence "every aspect of human life and every form of social activity." Indeed, though many of the most important institutions in society—"family, economic association, city and state—remain the same, but in proportion as they come under the influence of the higher spiritual order, they are directed to new ends." The form remains, but the Church, through grace, has sanctified the essence of these things. (p. 225)

> Modernity, then, reflects creation poorly. It attempts to reorder the universe according to the measure of men. Hence, modernity merely offers a shadow world, artificial and forced, finite, flawed, and ultimately, violent. Modern man's "whole life is spent inside highly organized artificial units—factory, trade union, office civil service, party—and his success or failure depends on the relations with this organization." In reality, Dawson argued, the twentieth-century secular and technological society made men less than human. "The trouble is that our modern secular culture is sub-literary as well as sub-religious," Dawson wrote in 1956. "The forces that affect it are in the West the great commercialized amusement industries and in the East the forces of political propaganda." Such mechanization seemed especially true in the United States. "I think a lot of nonsense is being talked about pluralism and the ideal of a pluralist society, and the United States as a typical pluralist society," Dawson told an American Jesuit in 1961. "Modern American society isn't pluralist, but modernist," Dawson said, "in the sense of a uniform, middle-class, liberal secularism as compared with the uniform, working-class, Marxist secularism of the USSR."

> A liberal-arts education—rooted in Christian humanism—also promotes a true universalism. "The primary school taught the children their letters, the grammar school taught them Latin and Greek, so that educated men everywhere possessed a common language and the knowledge of a common literature." Though the modernist considers a classical education as oppressively and impractically narrow, Dawson believed that "we need it more than ever before" to confront the horrors of mechanized and bureaucratized totalitarian modernity. "At first sight it seems highly absurd to take an English farmer's son or the son of a German shopkeeper and thrust him into writing imitation Ciceronian prose or copies of Latin verses," Dawson wrote. "Yet for all that it did set the stamp of a common classical tradition on a dozen vernacular European literatures and gave the educated classes of every European country a common sense of the standard classical values." As with most things, Dawson found proof for his ideas for the future of Christendom in the past, specifically in the "Republic of Letters" that developed under Erasmus during the Reformation. The liberal-arts vision served a vital purpose during the Reformation, as it provided the only glue that prevented northern Protestant Europe from completely separating from Catholic Central and Southern Europe. Dawson offered a chilling possibility, had not the classical liberal-arts vision prevailed. "There would have been two completely separate cultures in the Protestant North and Catholic South," Dawson predicted counterfactually, "divided by an iron curtain of persecution and repression which would have made the two parts of Europe as alien and incomprehensible from one another as Christendom was from Islam." If the liberal-arts vision could prevent the complete balkanization of Reformation Europe, it could also edify and unify western society in an age of ideologies.

And one last thought from ["Christopher Dawson and Pluralism"](https://media.christendom.edu/wp-content/uploads/2001/10/Gerald-J.-Russello-Christopher-Dawson-on-Pluralism.pdf) by Gerald Russello:

> Dawson would agree with the liberal contention that tolerance must be a basis for a just society. he would disagree, however, with the corollary contention made by the Rawlsians, that tolerance must necessarily include a refusal to make religious concerns part of the public sphere. Such a view of liberalism echoes the “antidogmatic principle” that Dawson, following Newman, denounced. Such a view of the place of religion, he thought, would result in a “civilization that fails to satisfy the needs of man’s spiritual nature,” one which “produces a state of spiritual confluence and moral maladjustment which weakens the vitality of the whole social organism. This is why the modern machine-made civilization, in spite of the material benefits it has conferred, is marked by a feeling of moral unrest and social discontent.” Dawson restated this theme even more strongly in his 1960 essay, “America and the Secularization of Modern Culture,” where he spoke of the violence that lay underneath such a secular order. Instead, Dawson contended that the religious principle that he found at the root of every culture was, paradoxically, better suited to address intercultural differences than the secular society. “[I]t is only when the religions of different cultures,” he wrote, “come into contact with one another ... that real contact is made with the spirit of the alien culture.” Liberalism, by denying this universal human trait, seems parochial in contrast. It is unable to deal with the larger passions of political and social life. Adam Seligman makes this same point in his recent book *Modernity’s Wager*, in which he argues for a renewed appreciation for the importance of transcendence in the construction of social reality.