---
layout: post
title: "R. W. Livingstone: Greek Ideals and Modern Life, Greek Humanism"
subtitle: "The grass is greener on this side"
category: "R. W. Livingstone: Greek Ideals and Modern Life"
author: "R. W. Livingstone"
tags: [church, gospel, Greeks]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

> The Greeks were neither too poor nor too rich to pursue with a disinterested and undistracted ardour the search for the good life. Nor were they hampered by religion, which in the Middle Ages and long after was unfavourable to such free quests. Creed, Dogma, Church, Revelation, Infallibility, Authority are not in their vocabulary. Their religion had no organized priesthood to enforce its tenets. Indeed it can hardly be said to have had tenets at all.  Hence it is a commonplace to contrast the liberty of the Greek world with the ecclesiastical obscurantism of the Church which used influence, and often force, to discourage roving speculation. The contrast exists. But the explanation is not as simple as is often assumed. At its worst the Church hampered the free exercise of reason as hostile to its vested interests and its established dogma. But it also persecuted, because it had something worth persecuting for, because it believed itself to possess a treasure so precious as to need defending by every means in its power. Christianity enshrined so valuable a belief that it seemed criminal even to weaken its outworks. Criticism of the cosmology of Genesis or the morals of the Book of Judges was resented partly from mere conservatism, but partly because they were bound up in the same volume as the Prophetic books and Gospels and belonged to their lineage. If the life, death, and resurrection of Christ and the ideals of the earliest Christian Church had been part of the Greek religion, if the Olympian worship could have ever been to men what Christianity was to St. Augustine or St. Francis or the mystics, or to those many men and women, nameless or known, to whom it was indeed the Way, the Truth, and the Life, the criticisms of it might have been less calmly received. But the popular Greek religion, apart from Orphism and the Mysteries, offered nothing to satisfy spiritual hunger. A man who went to it for comfort or guidance came away unhelped. In the 2nd book of the *Republic* Plato shows us how it appeared to an educated man of the fourth century; with its stories of the King of Heaven eating his infant son in order to avoid the danger of dethronement, and the son later retaliating by castrating his parent; of a god thrown out of heaven because he took his mother's part when his father, Zeus, was beating her. There could be little temptation to persecute men in order to maintain such legends. Indeed the very defects of Greek religion were a spur to a spiritual quest, and determined the direction which this quest took. ... The path to Humanism was indicated and opened.

However diligently we try to correct the Christian practice of our day, tottering from a lack of historical roots, let us not allow nostalgia to blind us to the precious truth of which the ancients had only intimations, glorious though their strivings were. Let us not let go of this truth, but let us also reach out for more of it, striving no less than did the ancients.

<h2 class="post-source"><a href="https://archive.org/stream/greekidealsmoder00livi#page/50"><i class="fas fa-book" aria-hidden="true"></i> source</a></h2>