---
layout: post
title: "Lipsius: De Constantia I.1-2"
subtitle: "Honesty is the best policy."
category: "Lipsius: De Constantia"
tags: [honesty, moods, persona, community, fitting in, running away]
comments: false
---

> Itaque non patria fugienda, Lipsi: sed Adfectus sunt: et firmandus ita formandusque hic animus, ut quies nobis in turbis sit et pax inter media arma. (1.1)

> So you shouldn't run away from home, Lipsius. These are just moods. We must train our minds so that we're calm amid chaos, and peaceful amid violence.

Easier said than done. But how can we thus prepare ourselves *with other people*, so that we don't have to face moods alone? For example, if I want to run away because I don't fit in and my persona is not me, I could instead be honest with those around me. If they don't like it and life together is impracticable, then at least they will see so, too, and I will have trained myself in honesty.

> Patriam ecce desertum is: sed dic serio, illam cum fugies, te quoque effugies? Vide ne contra sit: et tecum atque in pectore isto circumferas fontem fomitemque tui mali. ... Quocumque fugies, corruptum corruptoremque animum tecum habebis, comitem non bonum. Atque utinam comitem! Sed vereor ut ducem: quia non sequentur te adfectus tui, sed trahent. (1.2)

> So you're deserting your home. But tell me honestly, when you run away from home, are you also running away from yourself? Aren't you carrying around the source of your evil in your own heart? ... Wherever you run, you'll still have your corrupt and corrupting heart—not a good companion! And if only it were a companion, but I fear it's more of a ruler, because your moods won't follow you; they'll drag you along.

Continuing our example, if I were to run away to a more congenial place where I fit in better, I still wouldn't fit in perfectly. There's no place on earth where anyone fits in perfectly because people are different, and the communal life of a group is never frictionless for any of its members, unless they've lost their souls to the communal spirit. So only becoming more honest will change anything. But this training is all the more difficult, in a place where we more often pretend.