---
layout: post
title: "Michael Oakeshott: The Voice of Liberal Learning, A Place of Learning"
subtitle: "Old foundation, new buildings"
category: "Michael Oakeshott: The Voice of Liberal Learning"
author: "Michael Oakeshott"
tags: [education, culture, studia humanitatis, science, Jordan Peterson]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

> But the educational adventure of the fourteenth century sprang from an ever more extended recovery of this almost lost [Graeco-Roman] culture which revealed itself not only to have been one of great intellectual splendor, variety and reflective energy but also to be one in which a man of the fourteenth century could identify himself and which offered him a wealth of hitherto unheard-of invitations to explore and understand himself; ... This education has had often to be rescued from the formalism into which it degenerated. Its center of gravity moved from the culture of antiquity but without any firm settlement elsewhere. We have seen, sometimes regretfully, bits of this education fall away, having lost their compelling interest. It has been extended to include new and substantial vernacular langauges and literatures. It has accomodated, somewhat reluctantly, the novel and still inadequately self-understood inquiry which has absorbed so much of the intellectual energy of modern times, namely the natural sciences. It has had to resist the seductive advances of enemies dressed up as friends. (18-19)

> As it emerged in Western Europe, liberal learning was understood to be a concern to explore the invitations of the culture of antiquity, to hold before learners the mirror of this culture so that, seeing themselves reflected in it, they might extend the range and the depth of their understanding of themselves. This idiom of the self-understanding of liberal learning was never very satisfactory; it was substantial, not formal, and it has long since passed away. It has been succeeded by other, similarly substantial, self-identifications. ... And we have since become familiar with a claim of this sort made on behalf of Sociology [that all liberal learning should be understood through its lens]. ... The self-understanding of liberal learning must, I think, be sought in the recognition that its component inquiries, in spite of their substantial differences, have a common formal character and that they are related to one another in a manner agreeable with that formal character. ... these components may be resolved into and understood as so many different languages: the language of the natural sciences, for example, the language of history, the language of philosophy, or the language of poetic imagination. ... Perhaps we may think of these components of a culture as voices, each the expression of a distinct and conditional understanding of the world and a distinct idiom of human self-understanding, and of the culture itself as these voices joined, as such voices could only be joined, in a conversation—an endless unrehearsed intellectual adventure in which, in imagination, we enter into a variety of modes of understanding the world and ourselves and are not disconcerted by the differences or dismayed by the inconclusiveness of it all. And perhaps we may recognize liberal learning as, above all else, an education in imagination, an initiation into the art of this conversation in which we learn to recognize the voices. (27-30)

These other languages—natural science, philosophy, poetic imagination—can help us gain self-understanding, but only on the foundation of our history, and our old stories. The wisdom and experience of our forebears is our anchor and our guide, without which these other modes of discovery, as powerful as they may be, could go astray to our own destruction. (Communism, for example, was purported to be a scientific philosophy, and it aimed for a future powerfully attractive to the imagination.)

How can we ground all our education, whatever its language, in the ancient quests for virtue and for God? Jordan Peterson comes to mind as an example of this grounding, or at least mixing, of modern psychology and ancient stories.