---
layout: post
title: "Chrisopher Dawson: The Kingdom of God and History"
subtitle: "Eucatastrophe"
category: "Christopher Dawson: Essays"
author: "Christopher Dawson"
tags: [culture, church, education]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

> The appeal to tradition is one of the most characteristic features of the gospel. The New Testament opens with "the book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of Abraham," and the first preaching of the apostles starts with an appeal to a tradition that goes back to Ur of the Chaldeans and the earliest origins of the Hebrew people. Thus, the Christian Church possessed its own history, which was a continuation of the history of the chosen people, and this history had its own autonomous development which was independent of the currents of secular history. We have the age of the apostles and the age of the martyrs and the age of the fathers, each of them built on the same foundations and each contributing its part to the building up of the City of God.

> The chief problem, therefore, which we have to study is that of the relations between this sacred tradition and the other countless traditions that make up human history. For Christianity, no less than the other world religions, has entered the stream of historical change and has passed from one race to another, from civilization to barbarism and from barbarism to civilization. Men of different periods with different historical backgrounds and different national or racial traditions all belong to the all-embracing tradition of the Christian Church. We have Hellenistic Christians and Byzantine Christians, Romans and Syrians, Mediaeval Christians and Renaissance Christians, seventeenthcentury Spaniards and nineteenth-century Englishmen. Are these differences of culture and race accidental and ephemeral—details that have no relevance to the Christian view of life and the Christian interpretation of History? Or are they also of spiritual significance as elements in the divine plan and forms through which the providential purpose of God in history is manifested?

> Now from the early Christian point of view, at least, it would seem that the whole significance of history was entirely comprised in that sacred tradition of which we have spoken. The key to history—the mystery of the ages—was to be found in the tradition of the chosen people and the sacred community, and outside that tradition among the Gentiles and the kingdoms of men there is a realm of endless strife and confusion, a succession of empires founded by war and violence and ending in blood and ruin. The Kingdom of God is not the work of man and does not emerge by a natural law of progress from the course of human history. It makes a violent inruption into history and confounds the work of man, like the stone hewn from the mountain without human agency which crushes the image of the four world empires into dust. One of the most striking features of the Christian tradition is, in fact, its historical dualism: in the Old Testament the opposition between the chosen people and the Gentiles; in the New, the opposition between the church and the world—in the Augustinian theodicy, the two cities, Jerusalem and Babylon—the community of charity and the community of self-will. Yet this dualism is never an absolute one. Even the Old Testament, in spite of its insistence on the unique privilege of Israel as the exclusive bearer of the divine promise, also recognizes the hand of God in the history of the Gentiles. Even the powers that seem most hostile to the people of God are the instrument by which God works out his purpose. This is shown most remarkably in the Isaianic prophecy with regard to Cyras, for here a Gentile ruler is addressed by the messianic title as chosen and anointed by God to do his will and to deliver his people. No doubt here and elsewhere the divine action in history always has a direct reference to the fortunes of the people of God. But the converse is also true, for God's dealings with his people are of profound significance for the future of the Gentiles. In the end the Holy City will be the resort of all peoples; the Gentiles will bring their riches into it, and from it there will go forth the law of justice and grace to all the nations of the earth.

If this truly is the process that the Church should follow, then we seem to have stalled after the baptism of the Graeco-Roman world. This culture has spread to Europe and now to all four corners of the globe—though outside of Europe not as perfectly blended with native cultures. But what about the native cultures? How can we baptize and sanctify these also? This is the challenge in the 21st century for Christian education, missions, and (as the West is flooded with other religious traditions) at home in churches.

<h2 class="post-source"><a href="https://archive.org/stream/ChristianityAndCultureSelectionsFromTheWritingsOfChristopherDawson_989/dawsonChristianityAndCulture-SelectionsFromChristopherDawson#page/n90/mode/1up"><i class="fas fa-book" aria-hidden="true"></i> source</a></h2>
