---
layout: post
title: "Henry More: Enchiridion Ethicum, Prologue"
subtitle: "What is virtue, and why should we care?"
category: "DNF"
author: "Henry More"
tags: [virtue, love, learning, habit, politics, modernity, church, Christianity]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

> In eo enim errore plerique versari videntur, ut Systemata Ethica ad inutiles tantummodo Quaestiunculas ventilandas constitui debere arbitrentur, *Moralemque disciplinam* (quod ait Cicero) *ostentationem Scientiae, non Legem Vitae, putent.* Cum tamen verus ac genuinus Scopus Moralis Philosophiae sit, ut ex illius Praeceptorum lectione et meditatione Animus humanus amore Virtutis inflammetur, ut ad Virtutem perpetuo anhelet, ut Virtutem denique assequatur, cumque ipsa Virtute veram ac solidam Felicitatem.
{:.latin}

> Most people make the mistake of using ethical systems only to toss around useless abstract questions, and so as Cicero says, "They think the discipline of ethics is all about showing off what they know, rather than following a rule of life." But the real goal of ethical philosophy is for our hearts to burn with the love of virtue through our reading and meditating on great moral teachers, for us have a never-ending thirst for virtue, and finally for us to reach virtue and the true happiness that virtue brings.

All true learning involves not only a *science*, but also an *art*: that is, knowledge and practice, ideal and embodiment, head and hands working together to form the heart. Just as good learning inspires good action, so the formation of right habits steers our learning to ever higher aims.

> Fateor enim me omnem prensitasse occasionem exponendi ante oculos Christiani Orbis sanctum ullum Virtutis sensum, qui etiam Ethnicorum animis tam alte insedit, quemque per divinas illas voces atque sententias quas litteris mandarunt tam luculente testati sunt, ut merito nos Christianos pudeat, e nobis tam paucos esse qui aut tam iuste vivere deprehendimur, aut tam sapide loqui; quinimo eousque caecutisse, ut Virtutis tum rem tum nomen, quasi data opera, proculcemus et aspernemur tamquam vile quiddam et profanum, Barbarisque Gentibus reliquendum. In quo tamen non tam Nationibus exteris insultamus, quam crassam nostram ostentamus ignorantiam. Est enim vera Virtus Divinae quaedam Naturae participatio. Unde et praecipua Christianae Religionis pars est iure merito existimanda. Quamquam enim *nominibus* differunt tria illa quae toties in sermone hominum occurrunt, *Virtus*, *Gratia*, et *Divina* (quae dicitur) *Vita*; si quis tamen in ea penitius introspexerit, re prorsus reperiet idem. Vocari vero hanc Animi perfectionem *Dei vitam* quatenus *viva* illius in nobis imago est, non levis et superficiaria Virtutis notio et imaginatio, sed solidus potius pervicaxque rerum pulcherrimarum sensus et amplexus: *Gratiam* autem, quatenus gratuitum Dei donum est: Virtutem denique, ut quae vis quaedam Animi est qua Passionibus corporeis ita dominamur, ut in re quaque constanter prosequamur quod absolute optimum est, quemadmodum eam in sebsequenti Tractatu definivimus. Quod sane monuisse operae pretium censebam, ut foedo ac pernicioso quorundam errori hic occurrerem, qui, exsulante *Probitate*, *Divinam* tamen *Vitam* domi se putant posse retinere, et sub praetextu *Gratiae* *Virtutem* eiciunt foras.
{:.latin}

> I admit that I've seized every opportunity to show my fellow Christians the sacred meaning of virtue, to which the pagan ancients so admirably and beautifully testified in their writings, that we Christians should be ashamed that so few of us live as virtuously or speak as wisely as they. In fact, many of us go out of our way to ridicule the pursuit of virtue, saying that such a worldly and ungodly endeavor should be left to non-Christians. But in saying this we don't insult non-Christians as much as show our stupidity and ignorance. We must realize that true virtue is a kind of participation in the nature of life, and the better part of Christianity consists precisely of this. Virtue may sound like a different thing than grace and the spiritual life, but in fact they are the same. Virtue is a striving to perfect the soul: this is the spiritual life, because it is the spirit and image of God coming alive in us, a goodness that isn't just a puffed-up smugness or a tool of our sly ego, but a real and definite sense of beauty and an embrace of it. Virtue is grace because it is a gift of God, and it is a spiritual energy that helps us to tame our ego and our unstable emotions, so that in every situation we can pursue what is best, as I will discuss in this little book. I thought it worthwhile to mention all this because of how awfully mistaken about virtue most people are: on the one hand, religious skeptics approve of good behavior but think that those who have a taste for the spiritual life should leave at home, and on the other hand Christians think they're defending God's grace when they kick virtue out the door.

A magnificent condemnation of both parties in America's culture wars!

<h2 class="post-source"><a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=EjhRAAAAYAAJ&pg=PR13"><i class="fas fa-book" aria-hidden="true"></i> source</a></h2>