---
layout: post
title: "Jacques Ellul: The Technological Society, Foreword"
subtitle: "Showing another way"
category: "Jacques Ellul: The Technological Society"
author: "Jacques Ellul"
tags: [tech, common good, consumerism, work]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

> In Ellul's conception, then, life is not happy in a civilization dominated by technique. Even the outward show of happiness is bought at the price of total acquiescence. The technological society requires men to be content with what they are required to like; for those who are not content, it provides distractions—escape into absorption with technically dominated media of popular culture and communication. And the process is a natural one: every part of a technical civilization responds to the social needs generated by technique itself. Progress then consists in progressive de-humanization—a busy, pointless, and, in the end, suicidal submission to technique.

Technology itself is not the culprit, but the consumerism it engenders if it isn't controlled and directed to a good and well-thought-out end.

What are we required to like? Spending ourselves in work that we don't enjoy, work that serves causes that we don't care about, but it pays enough for our expensive, distracting lifestyle. What if we don't want to spend most of our time deadening our spirits with meaningless work? Then we will be outsiders, suspected of laziness and scorned for our material poverty, or hated for the riches that others lack. How, then, can we model another way of life? How our living differently be not an escape, but a reformation and a restoration?

<h2 class="post-source"><a href="https://archive.org/stream/JacquesEllulTheTechnologicalSociety#page/n8"><i class="fas fa-book" aria-hidden="true"></i> source</a></h2>