---
layout: post
title: "Lipsius: De Constantia 1.3"
subtitle: "No escape from yourself."
category: "Lipsius: De Constantia"
tags: [suffering, distractions, entertainment, running away, steadiness, deal with it, war, addiction, tech]
comments: false
---

{% include video.html url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/t966lVrHEzo?start=2472&end=2685" width="560" height="315" %}

> Aberratio haec aliqua a malis est, non fuga. ... Quid autem istud me iuvat, si lucem paullisper video, in arctiorem mox carcerem compingendus? Ita profecto est. Insidiantur animo externae hae omnes voluptates, et specie iuvandi magis laedunt. ... Non diu enim a se aberrat animus: sed vel invitus domum mox compellitur, et in vetus contubernium malorum. ... inter media gaudia videbis aliquid sive audies, quod sensum refricet tui doloris. Aut si paullisper quiesces: brevis ille velut somnus erit, et mox experrecto tibi eadem aut maior febris. Crescunt enim interpellatae quaedam cupidines, et vires capiunt ex intervallo.

> It gives us some relief from suffering, but not an escape. What use is it, if I'm out in daylight briefly, only to be put into the jail cell again? It's the same here. All this shallow entertainment preys on our minds, and they're all the more harmful for seeming pleasant. Our mind can't avoid itself for long, before it's forced against its own will to return home to its old agony. In the middle of pleasant distraction you'll see or hear something that brings back the pain. Or if you rest a little, it'll be like a dream that's soon over as you wake up to the same fever, or worse, since some urges grow when interrupted.

Lipsius's Charles Lang here talks about the distraction of travelling, but his critique applies equally to our own distractions, just a few clicks away and just as potent, in my experience as a miserable and pathetic high schooler who did nothing but play videogames.

> Hostem reperies apud te, et in isto (pectus mihi concutiebat) penetrali. Quid refert, ad quam pacata loca veneris? Bellum trahis tecum. Ad quam quieta? Turbae circum te, imo in te sunt. Pugnat enim pugnabitque secum semper discors hic animus, appetendo, fugiendo, sperando, desperando. Atque ut ii qui per timorem terga vertunt, magis exponunt se periculo intectos et aversos: sic errones et tirones isti, quibus cum affectibus numquam pugna fuit, sed tantum fuga. At tu, adolescens, si me audies, stabis: et gradum firmabis contra hunc doloris hostem. CONSTANTIA enim tibi ante omnia opus: et victor aliquis pugnando evasit, nemo fugiendo.

> You'll find the enemy within, in there. (He poked my chest.) What does it matter if you go to peaceful and quiet places? You bring the war with you, and the tumult is always around you—no, inside you. Your conflicted mind fights and always will fight against itself, desiring, fleeing, hoping, despairing. Those who turn their back in retreat expose themselves all the more to danger, like those immature and incompetent people who never once put up a fight with their feelings, but always run away. But you, youngster, if you listen to me you'll make a stand against pain the enemy, because you need STEADINESS most of all. Some have won by fighting, but no one by running away.

Often we want to run away from problematic situations: a job we don't like, people we don't want to be around, a place that's making us depressed. Fair enough. But what if we made it our first priority to confront the problems within us, and change our outward situation when a good opportunity comes along? Then our situation would be far less problematic, and a better alternative would be much more likely to present itself.