---
layout: post
title: "Chrisopher Dawson: The Christian View of History"
subtitle: "Traditions, unite!"
category: "Christopher Dawson: Essays"
author: "Christopher Dawson"
tags: [imagination, East, culture, globalization, education]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

> [After a discussion of Marxism.] The Christian view, on the other hand, is co-extensive with time. It covers the whole life of humanity on this planet and it ends only with the end of this world and of man's temporal existence. It is essentially a theory of the interpenetration of time and eternity: so that the essential meaning of history is to be found in the growth of the seed of eternity in the womb of time. For man is not merely a creature of the economic process a producer and a consumer. He is an animal that is conscious of his mortality and consequently aware of eternity. In the same way the end of history is not the development of a new form of economic society, but is the creation of a new humanity, or rather a higher humanity, which goes as far beyond man as man himself goes beyond the animals. Now Christians not only believe in the existence of a divine plan in history, they believe in the existence of a human society which is in some measure aware of this plan and capable of co-operating with it. Thousands of years ago the Hebrew prophet warned his people not to learn the ways of the nations who were dismayed at the signs of the times. For the nations were the servants of their own creatures the false gods who were the work of delusion and who must perish in the time of visitation. "But the portion of Jacob is not like these, for he that formed all things has made Israel to be the people of his inheritance" The same thing is true today of the political myths and ideologies which modern man creates in order to explain the signs of the time. These are our modern idols which are no less bloodthirsty than the gods of the heathen and which demand an even greater tribute of human sacrifice. But the Church remains the guardian of the secret of history and the organ of the work of human redemption which goes on ceaselessly through the rise and fall of kingdoms and the revolutions of social systems. It is true that the Church has no immediate solution to offer in competition with those of the secular ideologies. On the other hand, the Christian solution is the only one which gives full weight to the unknown and unpredictable element in history; whereas the secular ideologies which attempt to eliminate this element, and which almost invariably take an optimistic view of the immediate future are inevitably disconcerted and disillusioned by the emergence of this unknown factor at the point at which they thought that it had been finally banished. 

How can we work together with other traditional cultures against modern anti-tradition, to build a more virtuous world? I've been thinking about discussions going now in American classical education movement, concerning classical education in other parts of the world. How can we share the riches of our tradition and receive the riches of other traditions? In particular, how can we (individually as teachers, and as student bodies in schools) devote the necessary time to drink deeply from other traditions, when we already spend too little time receiving our own tradition? How can forge links between traditional cultures without devolving into the shallow form of multiculturalism so popular today? How can we aim to dive those faraway depths, without ending up only skimming from our own well and all others?

<h2 class="post-source"><a href="https://archive.org/stream/ChristianityAndCultureSelectionsFromTheWritingsOfChristopherDawson_989/dawsonChristianityAndCulture-SelectionsFromChristopherDawson#page/n65/mode/1up"><i class="fas fa-book" aria-hidden="true"></i> source</a></h2>
