---
layout: post
title: "Lipsius: De Constantia 1.15-22"
subtitle: "Fighting with Fate"
category: "Lipsius: De Constantia"
author: "Lipsius"
tags: [responsibility, power, divine will, learning, Epictetus, employment, vision]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

> Quid ad te curiose de libertate arbitrii quaerere, aut servitute? De coacta voluntate, aut ducta? Miser! Syracusae tuae capiuntur, et in pulvere pingis. Bellum tibi supra caput, Tyrannis, caedes, mors:quae superne certe immissa, nec quidquam ad tuum arbitratum. Timere ea potes, non cavere: fugere, et non vitare. Arma adversum haec indue, et arripe hoc Fatale telum. Quod dolores istos omnes non pungit, sed iugulat; non minuit, sed tollit. Ut urticam si cunctanter attingas, adurit; si fortiter, hebescit:sic luctus ista asperitas increscit, si lenioribus remediis attractes; si duris et fortibus, cedit. Necessitate autem nihil fortius est, quae solo impetu mollia haec agmina obruit et avertit. Quid enim tibi vis dolor?Non invenis locum in eo, quod fieri non solum potest, sed debet. Quid tu querela? Quatere hoc caeleste iugum potes, non potes excutere. *Desine fata deum flecti sperare querendo.* Necessitatis non aliud effugium est, quam velle quod ipsa cogat. Eximie eximius ille Sapientum: Ἁνίκητος εἶναι δύνασαι, ἐὰν μηδένα ἀγῶνα καταβαίνῃ, ὃν οὐκ ἕστιν ἐπί σοι νικῆσαι. *Invictus esse poteris, si in nullum certamen te dimittes, quod in te non est vincere.* At talis agon iste cum Necessitate est:quem quisquis suscipit, succumbit:et quod magis mirere, succubuit, priusquam suscepit. (21)

> What difference does it make to you to philosophize about the freedom or bondage of the will? You idiot! Your cities are being sacked, while you're drawing in the sand. War looms over you, tyranny, disaster, death. All of which come to you by higher powers, not by your choice. You can flee from them, but you can't be free of them; you can run, but you can't escape. So ready yourself for battle against them, and take up the spear of Fate, which will not just poke this depression of yours, but will destroy it. Think of a thorny plant: if you try to brush it aside, it hurts you. But if you stamp it down, it's out of the way. It's the same with this struggle of yours: it'll just get worse if you use light medicines, but you can end it if you take a strong dose of powerful stuff. Nothing is more powerful than Necessity, which by itself can overrun and scatter this army of weakness in you. What are you doing still depressed? You won't find a place for it if you do not only what you can, but what you must. What are you doing complaining? You can beat against this yoke from above, but you can't shake it off. "Stop hoping to change the will of the gods by complaining" (cf. Aeneid 6.376). There's no other escape from Necessity, than to will what it requires. As that wisest of men Epictetus said, "You can be invincible, if you enter no battle which you can't win." But such would be a battle with Necessity. Anyone who opposes it is defeated, and was defeated from the beginning.

How can we avoid losing battles, if we are forced to live in undesirable circumstances? The average adult doesn't work where he wants to, doesn't get the opportunities that he hopes for, and even when he finally succeeds, doesn't gain from his success like he imagined he would. What should be our goal, then, if our goals are too far above us, and often as insubstantial as the clouds? We must do what we must, what our situation demands, learning from it as much as we can.

And yet we must not lose sight of the vision above us, insubstantial as it may seem now, which will guide us when our situation does permit a change in direction.

<h2 class="post-source"><a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=ZmpSAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA38"><i class="fas fa-book" aria-hidden="true"></i> source</a></h2>