---
layout: post
title: "Bradley Birzer: Sanctifying the World, Pt. I"
subtitle: "Christopher Dawson on other cultures"
category: "Christopher Dawson: Essays"
author: "Christopher Dawson"
tags: [culture, East, West, Church]
comments: false
permalink: /:title
---

I'm reading Bradley Birzer's *Sanctifying the World: The Augustinian Life and Mind of Christopher Dawson*. Here are some quotes on Dawson's approach to other cultures within the mission of the Church to sanctify the world.

> "The Thomists in particular have until recently ignored the problem of the diversity of cultures and have shown no interest in Indian and Chinese philosophy. ... Thomism may represent the *philosophia perennis* of the Western world, and it may be potentially the *philosophia perennis* of the whole world," Dawson claimed. "But it is not so actually, and it cannot become so until it has incorporated the philosophical traditions of the rest of the world in the same way that it incorporated the philosophical traditions of Hellenism." (p. 66) [Birzer then goes on to reference Augustine's City of God 19.17 as a possible inspiration for Dawson: "This heavenly city, then, while it sojourns on earth, calls citizens out of all nations, and gathers together a society of pilgrims of all languages, not scrupling about diversities in the manners, laws, and institutions whereby earthly peace is secured and maintained, but recognizing that, however various these are, they all tend to one and the same end of earthly peace.  It therefore is so far from rescinding and abolishing these diversities, that it even preserves and adopts them, so long only as no hindrance to the worship of the one supreme and true God is thus introduced."]

> Culture is organic, developing slowly over time. It must be cultivated, Dawson argued, not abstracted, contracted, or decreed. "Culture does not arise spontaneously from the soil," Dawson explained. Instead culture "is an artificial growth which has been diffused from its original source in the Eastern Mediterranean by a complex process of transplantation and has been gradually made to bear fruit in a new soil by a long process of careful cultivation." (p. 78)

> "It is the mission of the Church to transform human life like a leaven, and transform all forms of life, i.e. all cultures." (p. 82)

> Therefore, the informed Christian must think beyond the mere Hebraic. To limit the Christian inheritance to the Jews and the Jews alone would be to retard the true development and very purpose of Christendom. "We do not believe, like the Protestants (or some Protestants) that the Bible is the only record of these dealings," Dawson wrote. "On the contrary, the whole history of Christendom is a continual dialogue between God and man, and every age of the Church's life, even the most remote and obscure, has some important lesson for us today. No one person or generation—or even all persons and generations combined—has a full understanding of God's purpose or of the Divine Economy. Yet each manifestation of God's grace offers a new piece of the puzzle, worth studying. Each person is a new and unique reflection of God, and each culture—as a network of minds—is a reflection of the Logos and the power of imagination. Each new created thing reveals more about the nature and Being of God. Not just the Jews, but the Greeks, Romans, and all other peoples, are worth studying, as they, in their finite ways, reveal some singular aspect of the Infinite. (pp. 87-88)

> "The Church remains what she has always been, the organ of the Divine Word and the channel of Divine Grace. It is her mission to transform the world by bringing every side of human existence and every human activity into contact with the sources of supernatural life. Even the modern State, that new Leviathan, that 'King over all the children of pride,' is not irrelevant to the work of grace nor impenetrable to its influence. If it does not destroy itself, it must be transformed and reconsecrated, as the power of the barbarian warrior became transfigured into the sacred office of a Christian king." (p. 92)

> "The world mission of Christianity is based on its conception of a spiritual society which *transcends all states and cultures* and is the final goal of humanity." Properly understood, history is "not a flat expanse of time, measured off in dates, but a series of different worlds and ... each of them had its own spirit and forms its own riches of poetic imagination." (p. 152)

> Equally important, the western Church never held an official policy of Europeanizing the world. Instead, the Church celebrated the diversity of cultures and often incorporated specific things from the various cultures that it found to be good, true, and beautiful. "All this does not mean that the Church ought to adopt a crude Europeanizing policy in the mission field: that it ought to ignore the special goods of other cultures and not welcome as generously as possible all the cultural values and aptitudes with which they can enrich the universal Catholic tradition," Dawson wrote in a private letter in 1947. "But after all that has been the traditional attitude of the Church in the past and it was by this assimilation of diverse culture elements that Western Christian culture was built up." (pp. 152-153) [This seems not to have been true in fact of European missions abroad, but it certainly was true within Europe as medieval European culture developed in all its variety. As Dawson says later, "There were a vast number fo political and social units—feudal fiefs, duchies, counties and baronies, loosely held together by their allegiance to king or Emperor. There were Free Cities and Leagues of Cities, like the Lombard Commune or the Hanseatic League. There were ecclesiastical principalities like the German prince-bishoprics, and the great independent abbeys. Finally there were the religious and military Orders—international organizations which lived their own lives and obeyed their own authorities in whatever country in Europe they might happen to be situated" (p. 170). As Dawson elsewhere notes, monasticism was originally an Eastern phenomenon which became central to Western culture.]

> If one accepts that God with absolute sovereignty created the universe, as Dawson believed, then one must also accept that every culture comes originally from God and, therefore, reflects God in some fashion, however obscure, fallen, and difficult to find. This argument is at once Stoic, Jewish, Christian, and specifically Augustinian. Since each culture comes from *the* source of all truth, it must also hold within it an element of the truth. Indeed, for a culture to be entirely false, according to Dawson's theological understanding, it would cease to exist. For only love–Divine Truth itself—animates all things. This applies to individual souls as well as to particular cultures. Those movements, therefore, which do not fall neatly into the scheme of western Christendom—Islam, Byzantium, Chinese and Indian cultures, and even the native peoples scattered throughout the world—must be studied accordingly. All peoples and all cultures play a role in the history of Christendom. For whatever reason—known to God alone—He "chose Rome instead of India as the temporal vehicle of [His] purpose and caused Catholicism to express itself through the medium of Western cultural forms." Just as the Christians baptized Greek philosophy, Roman polity, and Germanic heroic virtues and notions of kingship, so they must transform the essences of all world cultures and all human persons. Through the grace of the Holy Spirit, Dawson argued, Christians must sanctify the world. (pp. 153-154)