---
layout: post
title: "Erasmus: Mark 1:2-4"
subtitle: "Go to the desert!"
category: "Erasmus: Mark"
tags: [desert, solitude, stillness, distractions, habit]
comments: false
---

> Ioannes, iuxta Prophetarum oracula, praecursorem agebat, aqua tingens in deserto: non quod ipse ablueret peccata, sed quod suo baptismo invitaret ad poenitentiam vitae superioris, ut morbum suum agnoscentes, desiderarent eius adventum, qui solus baptizat Spiritu et igni. (1.4)

> In his desert baptisms John was a forerunner, as the prophets had foretold. He baptized people not to wash away their sins himself, but as an invitation for them to repent of how they'd lived so far, and recognizing the disease in themselves, for them to long for the coming of Christ, who alone baptizes by the Spirit and by fire.

What activities can we engage in, what habits can we form that will invite us to repent and kindle in us a longing for Christ?

> Relinquenda Iudaea tota cum sua Hierosolyma, cum suo Templo, cum suis victimis, cum suo Sacerdotio, cum suo Pharisaismo, emigrandum in desertum, ubi laetissimum accipias nuntium mox venturi Servatoris. (1.4)

> Leave Judah entirely, with its Jerusalem, its temple, it's sacrifices, its priesthood, its Pharisees, and go out into the desert, where you can hear the most delightful news of the coming Savior.

Let's put aside the New Perspectives on Paul debate over whether first-century Jews sought salvation by works. Let's instead think of how we can leave our own "Judah," our society with all its distractions that we sink into to take our minds off the long hours of soulless work necessary to pay for those distractions. Go out to the desert! Break the cycle of slavery to hateful work and the stuff that it purchases, create quiet spaces in your life to feed your spirit, and find other desert pilgrims to keep you company on your new path.