---
layout: post
title: "Erasmus: Mark 1:5-9"
subtitle: "Go down to the Jordan."
category: "Erasmus: Mark"
tags: [repentance, self-improvement, anger, hatred, work, suffering, weakness]
comments: false
---

> Iordanis enim sonat Hebraeis *fluvium iudicii*. Non iudicatur a Domino, qui seipsum iudicat. Hic est ille purificator fluvius, scatens e duobus fontibus, agnitione propriae iniustitiae, et recordatione bonitatis divinae. Hic est ille baptismus poenitentiae, flumen lacrimarum, ex intimis cordis venis aquas emittens amaras, sed acrimonia nitri abstergens omnes animae maculas. ... Propria benefacta commemorare, arrogantiae est: aliena mala referre, livoris est et malevolentiae, Propriam malitiam agnoscere, est Dei bonitatem glorificare.

> *Jordan* in Hebrew means "river of judgment." We aren't judged by God, if we are our own judges. Here is the purifying river from a double wellspring, when we recognize our own shortcomings and remember the goodness of God. Here is the baptism of repentance, when a torrent of bitter tears flows from our inmost heart and scours away the stains on our soul. ... To dwell on our own good deeds is arrogant, to blame the faults of others is bitter and hateful, but to know our evil is to glorify God's goodness.

Stop blaming other people for how your life isn't as you would like it, which not only wastes time but buries you in a pile of hatefulness that you don't even notice when you're too busy raging over the evil others do to poor, innocent you. Direct your gaze closer to home, repent of the mess you see there, and clean it up.

> Commodum ac suo tempore prodiit Iesus, relicta Nazareth viculo Galilaeae, ubi quod esset educatus ac diu versatus, etiam natus existimabatur. Haec videlicet est natura rerum Evangelicarum, ex minimis initiis paulatim ad summa proficere.

> In his own time Jesus came out from Nazareth, a little town in Galilee. Since that's where he was raised and had lived for a long time, people assumed he was born there. And that's how life in the gospel works: slowly it ascends from tiny beginnings to the highest heights.

So don't despair, if your life seems only tiny beginnings.

> Baptizatus est Iesus in Iordane, in quo baptizabantur et coriarii, et publicani, et milites, quo non aliud hominum gens inquinatius. ... Ille fons omnis puritatis, ille Rex Regum et Dominus dominantium, non fastidivit commune cum populo lavacrum: sed quisquis sese deicit apud homines, is attolitur apud Deum.

> Jesus was baptized in the Jordan, where also were baptized leather-tanners, tax collectors, and Roman soldiers, the lowest scum of society. ... He, the fount of all purity, the king of kings and lord of lords, did not turn away in disgust from being washed in the same water as the rabble. No, if we make ourselves lower in society, we are raised up with God.

And don't despair if right now you feel like the lowest of the low, slave to everyone around you, pouring out your life in menial work, grinding your mind against meaningless drudgery. God sees your suffering, and it has meaning in its likeness to Christ's own life, first as a manual laborer and then as a teacher misunderstood, hated, and killed.