---
layout: post
title: "Calvin: Psalm 1"
subtitle: "Break away from the crowd to cultivate better habits."
category: "Calvin: Psalms"
tags: [reading, stillness, Augustine, desire, discipline, intention]
comments: false
---

> Semper tanta corruptio in mundo grassata est, ut fere communis vivendi ratio nihil aliud est quam defectio a lege Dei. ... Fieri non potest, ut cor suum quisquam applicet ad meditationem divinae legis, nisi ab impiorum societate se colligat ac separet. (1.1)

> Corruption has always plagued the world so much that we could almost say ordinary life is nothing but rebellion against God's law. ... You cannot set your heart to meditate on divine law, unless you gather yourself up and separate yourself from the company of the apathetic.<sup>1</sup>

Hence our need for the countercultural habit of sitting still and reading. Augustine also warns us of our need to gather ourselves up, calling upon God as "dulcedo felix et secura, colligens me a dispersione, in qua frustatim discissus sum dum ab uno te aversus in multa evanui" (*Confessions* 2.1.1): "sweetness happy and safe, gathering up the bits of me that were scattered when I turned away from you, the unity, and diluted myself in many pursuits."

> Fieri non potest quin libenter in ea nos exerceamus, cuius amore tangimur. (1.2)

> We can't help exercising ourselves in whatever we love.

Desire precedes habit. Pressing ivory keys in a pattern over and over, pulling up endless weeds, admitting our ignorance in conversation—these activities, unpleasant in themselves, can become daily exercises joyfully undertaken if we love the beauty that emerges from them. But where does this love begin, if not in the exercise?

> Generaliter miseriae addicuntur impii, quia intus sibi male conscii sunt: et quoties reddenda est vitae ratio, tamquam expergefacti, somnium fuisse intellegunt, quod sibi visi sunt extra se ipsos felices. (1.5-6)

> People who live carelessly are generally miserable under the heavy weight of their conscience. Whenever they must give an account of their life, they wake up and see that all was a dream, when they felt they were happy outside of themselves.

In this age we are so easily "happy outside of ourselves." How can we intentionally and regularly give an account of our life and wake up from our half-sleep? How can we help others who have not even begun?

---

1. Though *apathetic* is too broad a word, the standard *wicked* for *impius* is so strong that we tend to think it refers to someone else, in no way to ourselves or our friends.